so we got a lot of comments back from my
prior videos about learning Cree we got
a lot of comments that didn't like her
sitting on my lap what we got comments
saying that she's too young to be my
girlfriend yeah well we're gonna upgrade
okay uh uh we got comments some of them
reflecting really cynical Canadian
attitudes
I wouldn't even really say racist
attitudes towards First Nations but just
contemptuous and dismissive attitudes
towards First Nations languages and I
wanted to make a positive video type
with the fact that you really can learn
Korean a jib way now we're just item
with this and you were mostly talking
about your own decisions to learn German
to not learn French your educational
options in terms of a kind of economic
instrumentality right and that's really
the exact opposite of what I want to
talk about at his video I mean it makes
sense but she like many of the people
who commented on my my prior video she
was saying in effect that she would look
at this as a high school student I'm
guessing not as a primary school dear
okay
is a high school student looking this
thinking how are you ever gonna earn
money out of being able to speak French
how are we gonna be able to earn money
out of studying a modern language like
Spanish or German etc right now think
somebody must have taught you to think
that way I mean okay so that's very
close so your dad directly taught you to
think of this in terms of economic
outcomes and many of the people
commenting on my video they're not crazy
I just disagree with them it's just a
different perspective they looked at
this question of teaching Cree studying
create each image of West at you or
mohawk or Denny or in these limbs they
looked at that as something incompatible
with a fundamentally economic world view
that all education has to serve this
type of profit seeking motive and an
outcome and it doesn't why do students
study Shakespeare how meaningful is
Shakespeare for the average
twelve-year-old or the average
fifteen-year-old or even the average 25
year old I think we can really question
that you know really I've done a small
number of people who find Shakespeare
really meaningful most don't most don't
for most it's just a drag from
most is just waste time I think a lot of
kids ask why am I being forced to
memorize this speech at a Hamlet you
know it's something that's gone by the
wayside by the way what meringue poems
memorizing literature we saw it to
memorize a couple things when I was
coming up no not until college okay okay
you did a memorization interesting okay
okay you know is this just a ritual
based on a smug sense of cultural
superiority that if you're a refined and
educated person you want to know
Shakespeare or what now in that context
learning Cree learning a jib way
learning Mohawk or dinner you can put in
another native language here is that
more or less meaningful then studying
Shakespeare for for at least some people
it's gonna be more meaningful right it's
gonna be more meaningful obviously if
you actually have creek heritage if you
care about Cree heritage in history and
customs okay but I actually it's a lot
more meaningful for a lot of white
people to think if you're a white person
and you can sit down and really examine
what's meaningful in your life you know
in a static sense of looking at one
snapshot it's probably not Shakespeare
and then if you look moving forward
let's just say you're a white person who
lives in Saskatoon Saskatchewan and you
drive around and interact with diverse
people in the northern half of
Saskatchewan as part of your job and
part of your life if you now take ten
hours a week to study study Shakespeare
how is that gonna improve your life or
make it more meaningful I've got to tell
you if you took that time and put it
into Cree it actually would make your
life more meaningful it actually would
be really rewarding that would be true
with Cree in northern Saskatchewan it
would be true of a jib way in western
ontario okay and let me tell you life in
saskatchewan is really bleak i think
life in western ontario is also really
bleak and I think it's intellectually
rewarding and meaningful for you as an
adult to sit down and take the time to
put into learning Cree or learning a jib
way I think it's rewarding and ease of
some practical value you're gonna make
new friends you're gonna see
perspectives you know a living language
it's not like studying
Greek it's not like studying Latin it's
really not they're all positive things
you know if that are gonna come out of
it especially if you live in a part of
Canada where 10% of the population
identifies as indigenous and at some
connection without that heritage but
even with that aside there's a question
of what are you comparing it to I don't
think very much of the math I was taught
in my education had any economic value
whatsoever and I remember other students
loudly complaining why am i learning
this crap what I learned about math
didn't help me I cannot Blair learned
about physics didn't help me economic if
you take a narrow economic view of the
utility of education and say everything
this person learns everything we teach
has to put dollars and cents into their
pocket there's not that much to teach
there's not that much to learn is there
now on the other hand if you look at
learning Korean learning a jib way as
part of the meaning of life and having a
meaningful life where you're saying well
a lot of a lot of white people spend
eight hours a week watching sports let
you sleep eight hours watching junk on
TV but you know football baseball ice
hockey that's a lot of time that's a lot
it's a significant percentage of your
brain and your emotional mental energy
you could be putting that time into
learning ancient Greek you could be
putting that time into learning Latin
you could be I can speak from experience
this you could put that time into
learning Sanskrit or Pali these are some
languages I really have experience with
you know you could be putting that time
into learning Chinese that that's true
you know
and I've got to tell you positively a
language like creative way is much much
easier to learn than Chinese it's much
easier there's no comparison there's the
level of difficulty and the point at
which it would become rewarding to learn
that language the point which you can
put a sense together so I mean you've
been studying Chinese for a couple of
months and not not that hard not putting
that much evident but still to string a
sentence together in Chinese for someone
who speaks English to the first night
which are really really challenging
right
now you know I can also ask so that
that's difficulty how difficult is this
do in the absolute sense if you're you
don't even need to be intelligent nobody
needs to be intelligent to learn the
language little children learn languages
you can be completed he has to have a
high level of ability on language it
really doesn't take intelligence you
just have to do the work if you do the
work you get the results with language
learning
maybe maybe being brilliant helps but I
don't know if it even helps 10% you know
it's it's a small edge to be brilliant
more talk about language learning it's
something any idiot can do including you
including you dear viewer so that's
question difficulty the other question
is how meaningful or how rewarding is it
in your life right so this kind of
through the day we type of this with
French you can learn French is there any
book you want to read in French that
hasn't been translated in English is
there anything you want to learn or
access you know that you're not going to
be able to access in English maybe the
answer is yes for you maybe you're
passionate about some kind of French
philosophy or French literature that
makes it a review fine your call your
decision right for me when I look at a
lot of these languages it's very hard
for me to be motivated to learn French
for that reason there's really nothing I
want to read in French there's nobody
right now in my life there's nobody I
want to talk to in French I don't really
want to live in France we may make that
decision we may move to France it's
quite possible in our future actually
you know okay but it's actually really
hard for me to make that commitment to
learning French an ancient language like
Sanskrit or Palli or Latin or Greek
maybe there's something you want to read
that's gonna make that meaningful and
rewarding to you right maybe that's
gonna light up your life you live in
northern Saskatchewan or you live in
Western Ontario and it's gonna let it's
gonna make your nights a little bit less
cold and bleak and awful if you can sit
there and read Aristotle in the original
ancient Greek or or whatever it is you
like you can sit there and read Cicero
and Latin etcetera right I know I know I
know people watch sports instead of
doing these things and people descend
into alcoholism and gambling and skiing
and other things that try to make their
lives feel meaningful when they could be
reading a lottery I gotta tell you I do
think for the vast majority of people if
you live in Western Ontario you know
studying a jib way studying Soto or
studying one of these line
or possibly studying og Cree which is
also a dialect of a Ghibli
I think that really is more meaningful
it really is more rewarding maybe in
ways that would surprise you you know
now of course it can open up doors for
you economically absolutely it can but i
from my perspective that is really
beside the point you know if you're
living in northern Saskatchewan learning
Cree I think it'd be tremendously you
know I even met I met one white police
officer and he started learning Cree you
know and a lot of his experience in
terms of law enforcement and the prisons
and everything else was was working with
with Cree people and so on
there are ways in which that's going to
enrich his practice his life his career
as a police officer it's gonna people
are gonna share other perspectives with
him it's gonna make him a bit of a
cultural insider it's gonna give him a
different perspective that he would
never have as a white man only speak
English or if he learns learnt Chinese
or what have you
yeah okay sorry I didn't know if you
want to jump in but I mean we deal with
this line of reasoning a lot in in
veganism where people say well it's just
a personal choice of course it's
personal choice what language you learn
is a personal choice you can talk to
creep people who will explain to you
that they made the decision not to learn
Cree they made the decision this
language doesn't matter them well it's
creative layer or what have you there
are people who will walk you through
what their their reasons are of course
the personal choice but part of the
reason for human beings having a
conversation is to talk about is this a
good choice or is this a bad choice
what's the best choice and for sure I
mean I've I've known people who taught
themselves Sanskrit I taught myself
Palli I've met people who taught
themselves Latin and Greek and Chinese
all these languages and I myself have
studied many languages including Chinese
bla bla bla I have a lot of experience
the language you can do it it is just
your choice sure but it's probably a
choice that not enough people have
really thought about or really taken
seriously when you watch football
sitting on the couch every week you're
making no personal progress you're
gaining nothing you're left at the end
of it entertained but empty okay if you
took those few couple of hours a week to
work on creo Jib way or any first
nations language you would be making
progress you'd be making progress
day-by-day
by week your life would become more
meaningful it brings a lot of really
positive stuff in your life it's very
rewarding can I say it's easy I can tell
you it's easier than learning Chinese I
can tell you you know and we we just
can't look at our own education whether
on a systemic level or in terms of just
our own our own private lives as
individuals purely in terms of economic
outcomes I
if you feel Shakespeare is meaningless I
feel you
you know I completely completely in some
way Shakespeare's meaningful and show
you some ways it's meaningless that's up
to you
that's your personal choice also but we
live in a society that thinks nothing of
demanding that you take on this kind of
literature with no possible economic
outcome and really no possible way for
you to progress personally through it
for you to evolve or sign no pause
anyway
and I can tell you this study of
languages it's really rewarding in all
those ways and whether or not it's more
work than studying William Shakespeare I
think that's debatable okay